# What Is An API?

## Objectives

 1. Understand the difference between transmission of data vs data and
    presentation.
 2. Understand the value of APIs.

## Lesson

Let's say you're building an app that allows users to find the nearest
coffee shop that is most likely to have an open table where they can
sit and work on their novel.

You need to be able to search for coffee shops and find out things like
how many people have recently gone there.

One of the great things about the web is that we can find all kinds of
data and use it in new and interesting ways. In this case, we know that
Foursquare deals with exactly that sort of thing, so we'll try to get
data from them.

### Screen Scraping

One thing we could do is *screen-scrape* Foursquare. Screen scraping is
a technique where you request a URL in the same way a web browser would,
but you do so in code so that instead of seeing rendered HTML, you have
to *parse* the HTML to see what you want.

So, we could go to Foursquare and use their search feature and look at
the URL generated by the search to figure out how to create our own
request. In this case, searching for coffee shops in New York would
generate a URL like this:

`https://foursquare.com/explore?mode=url&near=New%20York&q=coffee%20shops`

We could then use [Nokogiri](https://github.com/sparklemotion/nokogiri)
and Ruby to request that page and parse the data.

```ruby
# irb
doc = Nokogiri::HTML(open('https://foursquare.com/explore?mode=url&near=New%20York&q=coffee%20shops'))
```

This will give us the full search results page from Foursquare. We could
inspect that source and figure out that the results are all in `<li>`
elements with a `singleRecommendation` class, and do something like:

```ruby
# irb
doc.css('li.singleRecommendation').each do |recommendation|
  # ...
end
```

And basically keep drilling in from there, trying to figure out how to
reliably extract a name, address, ID, and so on, from each result. Many
hours later we can feel good about getting this data.

Now what happens when Foursquare does a minor CSS tweak and changes
`.singleRecommendation` to `.recommendationCard`.

Our whole app is broken! And we won't know about it until a user gets an
error. And Foursquare has no responsibility to us because scraping their
page is not an intended use of their system, they wouldn't know that
we're doing it, and wouldn't be able to tell us about the change even if
they wanted to.

Okay, instead of spending hours and hours parsing their new HTML, let's
see if they have an API.

### APIs

An API (Application Programming Interface) is a way for one system to interact with another via a well-defined *interface*. An interface is any endpoint that can be used to take actions and consume data on a given application. The HTML response of every web site is an interface, for instance. 

The web interface provides HTML, which is a combination of *data* (the
dynamic values like venue names, addresses, and check-ins) and
*presentation* (HTML tags, CSS classes, JavaScript effects) meant to be
consumed by a web browser. This is great for end users who want to see
something visually compelling.

Some applications, knowing that their data might be of use to other
applications, go a step further, providing an API as well as the
standard web interface.

The benefit of an API is that it's put together explicitly for the
purpose of being used by another system, rather than being viewed by a
human, so the *data* that it returns is unencumbered by the
*presentation*, preventing the consuming code from having to wade
through HTML just to find values. A good API just provides data in the
easiest format possible for code to digest.

#### JSON

So if a web interface provides HTML, what does an API
provide?

Most modern web APIs use JavaScript Object Notation, or
JSON, as a standard way of describing and defining data.

**Note:** Some APIs, usually older ones, will use XML rather than JSON
to describe data, though that is increasingly rare. However, the
remnants of that great stone age are found in AJAX, which stands for
Asynchronous JavaScript and *XML*, XML being the standard when AJAX hit
the scene. When we use AJAX today we're almost always using JSON rather
than XML, but we haven't changed the name because *AJAJ* would be a
weird acronym.

JSON looks a lot like a Ruby hash, and as a result, figuring out how to
access a given piece of data is a snap.

```json
{
  "name": "Cuppa Joe's",
  "address": "123 Not A Fake Address Street",
  "city": "Real City",
  "state": "New York",
  "zip": "10015"
}
```

Much better than trying to find all that in a bunch of HTML tags, right?

**//Flat-fact:** JSON is canonically pronounced like the name "Jason",
because it makes it easy to carve up data.

![Jason Zelda](http://i.giphy.com/FObfWuRreF0as.gif)

### Finding And Using APIs

Many websites have APIs that you can communicate with your applications. The
easiest way to find out if the site you want to use provides an API is
to Google `sitename api`, or just go to the site and look for a link to
a "Developers" or "API" section.

For instance, if we go to [Foursquare](http://foursquare.com) and look
in the navigation links at the bottom, we'll see a
[Developer](https://developer.foursquare.com) link that we can start to
explore, and from there we can find a [venue search](https://developer.foursquare.com/docs/venues/search) API endpoint that will allow us to do exactly what we were trying to do above with our screen scraping.

Most good APIs will have extensive documentation about how to use the
API, what functions are available, and what data you can access. Be sure
to read through the documentation very carefully. Every API is a little
bit different, and documentation quality varies, so you'll need to be
analytical and methodical, and prepared for some trial and error, when
you're learning to consume a new API.

Most good APIs also use REST, just like Rails, so finding your way
around should start to feel familiar and consistent as you learn what
resources are available. Keep in mind, though, that you will only have
access to what the API creator allows. Not all applications open up all
features for API access, so make sure what you need is available ahead
of time.

## Summary

We've looked at getting data from other websites via screen scraping,
and how cumbersome and brittle it is trying to integrate data with
presentation, like an HTML page. We've learned what an API is, how it
differs from an interface meant to be consumed by a browser, and how to
find out if a site offers an API.

<p data-visibility='hidden'>View <a href='https://learn.co/lessons/what-is-an-api-reading'>What Is An API? </a> on Learn.co and start learning to code for free.</p>
